GEP-0049: Gardener Landscape Kit (#48)
gardener/enhancements: geps/0049-gardener-landscape-kit/README.md

# GEP-0049: Gardener Landscape Kit

## Table of Contents

- [GEP-0049: Gardener Landscape Kit](#gep-0049-gardener-landscape-kit)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Repositories](#repositories)
    - [Components](#components)
    - [Versions and OCI References](#versions-and-oci-references)
    - [Configuration API](#configuration-api)
  - [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Appendix](#appendix)

## Summary

The Gardener Landscape Kit (GLK, or `gardener-landscape-kit`) aims to deliver tools and best practices for managing Gardener, from small-size to large-scale landscapes.
It introduces a modular framework that **generates** resources for Gardener and well known extensions, building on Kubernetes as the underlying deployment system.

> Leveraging GitOps principles, GLK simplifies operations, reduces integration overhead, and enhances developer productivity.

Reviewer: Is it developer productivity or operator productivity? Or something in between because of devops?

> With [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), [Flux](https://fluxcd.io/), [Kustozmiation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) and co., a wide range of widely accepted tools are utilized, enabling an efficient and extensible configuration management for operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), [Flux](https://fluxcd.io/), [Kustomize](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) and co., a wide range of widely accepted tools are utilized, enabling an efficient and extensible configuration management for operators.
```

## Motivation

While Gardener brings great abstraction and extensibility for managed Kubernetes clusters, it currently lacks a project addressing the setup routines and maintenance of such landscapes.

> Community members are required to implement configuration and landscape management themselves, leading not only to additional complexity for new-starters, but also to significant investments in enterprises.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gardener operators are required to implement configuration and landscape management themselves, leading not only to additional complexity for new-starters, but also to significant investments in enterprises.
```

It is especially challenging for the community to maintain the version vector with Gardener and extensions.

### Goals

- Generate Kubernetes manifests for Gardener, well known extensions and utility controllers.
- Apply GitOps principles for configuration management.

> - Allow generic modifications to the deployment process.

Reviewer: Do we want to be more specific what this means? Can I ask GLK to make me a sandwich before each deployment? Probably not.

- Support update and migration scenarios for included components.

> - Simplify component implementations and increase developer productivity.

Reviewer: Is it about component implementations or about the deployment/lifecycle management of components? My assumption is that GLK tries to standardise and simplify the lifecycle management, but does not really impact the development of components, e.g. a provider extension.

- Support manifest template processing through [OCM](https://ocm.software/), as the standard transport tool in NeoNephos.
- Maintaining a default, static vector of compatible component versions.

### Non-Goals

- Serving a unified API (abstraction) for landscape management.
- Definition of a compatibility matrix for Gardener and extensions.
- Provide holistic default configuration.
- Building OCM component descriptors.

## Proposal

The Gardener Landscape Kit will be an executable toolkit that bootstraps landscapes and updates Gardener and dependent components. It exists of the following building blocks:

**Manifest Generation**

> GLK generates Kubernetes manifests for Gardener and its extensions using a modular, component-based approach. Each component (e.g., `gardener-operator`, `garden`, `provider-xyz`) is responsible for producing one or more manifests and may define dependencies on other components. Operators can review and modify generated manifests, with manual changes preserved across subsequent generations. These manifests are intended to be managed in a Git repository, enabling GitOps workflows.

Author: The details are described in the [Components](https://github.com/timuthy/enhancements/blob/2ef489509c908c9245c5e22fcb4a47dcab5e1e8e/geps/0049-gardener-landscape-kit/README.md?plain=1#L112) chapter. I can add a link here to make this clearer.

> GLK generates Kubernetes manifests for Gardener and its extensions using a modular, component-based approach. Each component (e.g., `gardener-operator`, `garden`, `provider-xyz`) is responsible for producing one or more manifests and may define dependencies on other components. Operators can review and modify generated manifests, with manual changes preserved across subsequent generations. These manifests are intended to be managed in a Git repository, enabling GitOps workflows.

Reviewer: Let's link directly in the document.

> Running against such repositories allows GLK update versions to migrate existing resources. If migration is required during runtime, a component would typically generate a special `Job` manifest accomplishing this job in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: @timuthy perhaps add these examples/clarifications to the doc

**OCI Image Resolution**

GLK automates the resolution and substitution of OCI image references (e.g., in `Helm` charts or `Extension` resources). It consults either an [OCM](https://ocm.software/) component descriptor or a default image vector maintained by GLK.
This ensures:
- **Consistent Deployments:** Operators can deploy Gardener and extensions with validated versions out of the box, without manual release management.
- **Image Transportation:** Validated deployments and images can be promoted across environments (e.g., `Dev` → `Canary` → `Live`).
- **Sovereign Cloud Support:** Required images can be mirrored to private registries for isolated or air-gapped environments.

**Deployment System**

> GLK standardizes on [Flux](https://fluxcd.io/) as the primary deployment system, leveraging its strong GitOps support and Kubernetes-native design. GLK generates Flux based configuration to establish a seamless and automated deployment flow.

Author: I understand the concern, but I do not consider a detailed comparison of deployment or GitOps tools to be essential for this proposal or for GLK. Our primary goal was to find a suitable tool for managing Gardener landscapes. We conducted a successful PoC with Flux and also received positive feedback from Gardener community members who are already using it. As a result, we saw no compelling reason to evaluate additional alternatives, even if this approach may not be fully comprehensive from a scientific perspective.

> GLK standardizes on [Flux](https://fluxcd.io/) as the primary deployment system, leveraging its strong GitOps support and Kubernetes-native design. GLK generates Flux based configuration to establish a seamless and automated deployment flow.

Reviewer 3: One emerging new approach, which might land in upstream kubernetes, is https://kro.run. Maybe it is worth look, albeit kro is not ready for production yet.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

The Gardener Landscape Kit (GLK) is a standalone toolkit, not a Kubernetes controller, meaning it does not directly watch or reconcile cluster resources.
Its primary use cases are:

- **Local Execution**: For initial setup, such as onboarding a new landscape by generating manifests and initializing repositories.
- **Automated Execution**: For ongoing operations, GLK is designed to run in automated environments like CI/CD pipelines or Kubernetes `Job`s. This is the intended way to apply updates, adopt new GLK releases, and integrate new component versions.

To support these scenarios, GLK will provide reference workflows and best-practice configurations.

### Risks and Mitigations

GLK is planned as a new product, on top of existing Gardener projects and components.
At this point, there hasn't been identified any major risks.

## Design Details

The Gardener Landscape Kit is a standalone executable. Its primary subcommand, `generate`, creates the Kubernetes manifest files that operators commit to Git. These manifests are then automatically deployed to the target cluster(s) by Flux as part of a GitOps workflow.

### Repositories

> Git repositories are an essential part for landscape and configuration management. In essence, the landscape kit differentiates between two types of repositories, to foster reusability across landscapes:

Reviewer: Is it important that `git` is used or could any other version control system, e.g. `mercurial`, be in use? In other words, does our implementation depend on the version control system or do we just propose to use a version control system?

To ensure a smooth deployment flow, a single conceptual component may be split into smaller ones to properly manage dependencies. For example, deploying the Gardener core involves two components:

- A `gardener-operator` component, which installs the Operator Helm chart.
- A `garden` component, which creates the Garden resource in the runtime cluster.

From a technical standpoint, each component implements the `component` interface shown below. GLK invokes this implementation when running the `generate base` or `generate landscape` commands.

```go
// Interface is the components interface that each component must implement.
type Interface interface {
	// Name returns the component name.
	Name() string
	// GenerateBase generates the component base dir.
	GenerateBase(Options) error
	// GenerateLandscape generates the component landscape dir.
	GenerateLandscape(LandscapeOptions) error
}
```

In addition to generating manifests, components can also handle migrations in two ways:
- **Manifest Modification**: By modifying existing manifests in the target repositories (e.g., moving a value from a deprecated field to a new one).

> - **In-Cluster Migration**: By creating Kubernetes `Job`s that execute migration tasks within the cluster.

Reviewer 2: Is this also part of the above interface, or how will this be handled? What does a component need to implement when performing a migration?

| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `flux`                                                  | Flux deployment and controller configuration (mainly [Source controller](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/source/))                       |
| `gardener-operator`                                     | [`HelmRelease`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/source/) for `gardener-operator`                                                         |
| `gardener-garden`                                       | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for `garden` resource                                       |
| `virtual-garden-access `                                | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for generating a Kubeconfig for Flux for the virtual garden |

> | `garden-config`                                         | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for configuration in the virtual garden                     |

Author: `garden-garden` deploys the `Garden` resource, whereas `garden-config` contains everything that is deployed into the virtual garden. I amended the description to make this clear.

| `extension-runtime-gvisor`                              | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for runtime `Extension` resource                            |
| `extension-shoot-cert-service`                          | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for certificate service `Extension` resource                |
| `extension-shoot-dns-service`                           | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for DNS service `Extension` resource                        |
| `extension-shoot-networking-problemdetector`            | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for network problem detector `Extension` resource           |
| `extension-shoot-oicd-service`                          | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for OIDC service `Extension` resource                       |

**Acceptance Criteria**

> GLK should contain components of common interest for the community. Throughout the development of the project, this soft requirement must be redefined, such as:

Reviewer 4: Does this mean other components must find their own way to get installed in a Gardener landscape?

- **OCM Component Descriptors**: [OCM](https://ocm.software/) component descriptors can be used to let GLK resolve OCI references in generated manifests. In addition, this strategy may produce [image vector overwrites](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/deployment/image_vector.md) and [image vector component overwrites](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/deployment/image_vector.md#image-vectors-for-dependent-components) for Gardener and extensions. This is the recommended approach for productive landscapes that use OCM for releases and component transport.

- **Manual**: This strategy gives operators full control over GLK's version vector ((see this [example](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-landscape-kit/blob/main/componentvector/components.yaml)).
This allows using tools like [Renovate](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate) to manage version updates according to a custom policy.

### Configuration API

A configuration file is required for GLK. Below is an excerpt of the planned API.

```yaml
apiVersion: landscape.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: LandscapeKitConfiguration

> # git: # Version control information for GLK to produce Flux configuration

Reviewer: Should `git`, `components`, `ocm`, and `versionConfig` all be top-level fields or do we want to have a `spec` tree? Could you please explain your reasoning?

Author: The reasoning is that the component config is aligned with other component configs in the `gardener` (and `k8s.io`) projects where `spec` isn't a thing, see https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/pkg/apis/config.

I think this originates from the fact that we don't have a controller reconciling the resource, so we don't need to differentiate between `spec` and `status`.

#   url: https://github.com/<org>/<repo>
#   ref:
#     branch: <branch-name>
#   paths:
#     base: ./base
#     landscape: ./
# components: # Control of enabled and disabled components
#   exclude:
#   - component-name
#   include:

> #   - component-name 

Reviewer 2: Do I need this? What if I just want everything to be included?

  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Repositories](#repositories)
    - [Components](#components)
    - [Versions and OCI References](#versions-and-oci-references)
    - [Configuration API](#configuration-api)
  - [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Appendix](#appendix)

## Summary

The Gardener Landscape Kit (GLK, or `gardener-landscape-kit`) aims to deliver tools and best practices for managing Gardener, from small-size to large-scale landscapes.
It introduces a modular framework that **generates** resources for Gardener and well-known extensions, building on Kubernetes as the underlying deployment system.
With [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), [Flux](https://fluxcd.io/), [Kustomize](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) and co., a wide range of widely accepted tools are utilized, enabling an efficient and extensible configuration management for operators.

## Motivation

While Gardener brings great abstraction and extensibility for managed Kubernetes clusters, it currently lacks a project addressing the setup routines and maintenance of such landscapes.

> Gardener operators are required to implement configuration and landscape management themselves, leading not only to additional complexity for new-starters, but also to significant investments in enterprises.

Reviewer 5: I see another benefit of the proposal (a bit more abstract, though):
Currently, every company using Gardener in production has its own deployment setup. Changes in gardener-operator and friends need to consider many different use cases/setups.
The GLK would not only help newcomers but also provide a reference implementation (even if heavily invested companies might not use it). This reference implementation would establish best practices, common approaches, and recommendations. This would allow the community to move together more closely in these regards and might allow us to scope changes in gardener-operator and friends to the recommended use cases/setups.

**Manifest Generation**

GLK generates Kubernetes manifests for Gardener and its extensions using a modular, component-based approach. Each component (e.g., `gardener-operator`, `garden`, `provider-xyz`) is responsible for producing/updating one or more manifests and may define dependencies on other components (see the [components chapter](#components) for more details). Operators can review and modify generated manifests, with manual changes preserved across subsequent generations. These manifests are intended to be managed in a Git repository, enabling GitOps workflows.

**OCI Image Resolution**

GLK automates the resolution and substitution of OCI image references (e.g., in `Helm` charts or `Extension` resources). It consults either an [OCM](https://ocm.software/) component descriptor or a default image vector maintained by GLK.
This ensures:
- **Consistent Deployments:** Operators can deploy Gardener and extensions with validated versions out of the box, without manual release management.

> - **Image Transportation:** Validated deployments and images can be promoted across environments (e.g., `Dev` → `Canary` → `Live`).

Reviewer 6: Nit: I believe, the more neutral terminology is often: dev-> qual -> prod

|---------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `flux`                                                  | Flux deployment and controller configuration (mainly [Source controller](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/source/))                       |
| `gardener-operator`                                     | [`HelmRelease`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/source/) for `gardener-operator`                                                         |
| `gardener-garden`                                       | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for `Garden` resource                                       |
| `virtual-garden-access`                                 | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for generating a Kubeconfig for Flux for the virtual garden |

> | `garden-config`                                         | [`Kustomization`](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/) for resources applied to the virtual garden                 |

Reviewer 5: Later on, we might consider deploying stuff to all seeds (e.g., via [gardener-extension-shoot-flux](https://github.com/stackitcloud/gardener-extension-shoot-flux))
